Citra Progress Report 2023 H2 (#195)
citra-emu/citra-web: site/content/entry/citra-progress-report-2023-h2/index.md

Solving this issue in Citra requires tapping into making Citra multithreaded, to run each game thread in a dedicated host thread to mimic the way hardware works. However, the benefits of this approach aren't clear aside from this particular weakness,implementing it requires an almost complete kernel rewrite to make it multithread ready and would sacrifice a lot of emulation accuracy.

Faced with this conundrum, PabloMK7 needed to find a way to offload the socket operations from the main emulation thread without intrusive changes to the existing kernel and service code. His answer was adding a new function, RunAsync, that can execute any blocking code in a separate host thread while putting the requester game thread to sleep. This allows the emulated scheduler to select a new game thread to run so that the game can continue doing work. Eventually, when the blocking code finishes, the game thread is resumed and the received socket data is finally processed.

{{< figure src="smash.png"

>     title="Freezing no more!" >}}

Author: Can I remove all mention of online and repurpose this as a "socket service problem"? At least we can include most of this without advertising its for online?

There is only one source of truth for these questions, the console itself. And that's where Steveice10 started looking. After running a bunch of hardware tests with various configurations and parameters he managed to replicate the exact way the hardware behaves, improving the accuracy of the interpreter and fixing the crashes in the process. The improvements have also been ported to the GLSL backend and x86 shader JIT so everyone can be happy xD 
With the above out of the way, it’s finally time to get into the more fancy graphical fixes.

## Chapter 1 or how color theory is actually tricky

> Go! Go! Kokopolo Harmonious Forest Revenge is a 3DS port of a DSiWare title available exclusively as a 3DS North American physical release. The physical release happened last year on September 16th 2022, sementing it as part of the dying breath of the 3DS ecosystem. Normally games released this late into a console’s lifespan tend to be quick cash grabs, made with existing engines like Unity, which works well on Citra. However this case was different, as the game exhibited peculiar discoloration in its tiled graphics that made it quite disorienting to play.

Reviewer: 👍

> The problem was also exclusive to the hardware renderers, with the software renderer having correct output, albeit at unplayable frame rates. This fact made GPUCode confident that it wouldn’t be hard to track down the issue by figuring out which part of the rendering pipeline was causing the divergent pixel values. And this was indeed correct, the issue was quickly found to be from the lighting LUT sampling helpers, where the coordinate to sample from was just a few pixels off compared to the software implementation. These LUTs are simple buffers used by the fixed function lighting unit for its various operation, yet it appears the game is (ab)using them as a sort of colour palette. This means that even the tiniest differences in sampling can cause incorrect colours to be used. Adjusting the hardware renderers to match the software behaviour was enough to correct all the rendering problems in this game and others, such as 3D Fantasy Zone II.

Reviewer: 👍

{{< single-title-imgs-compare

>     ""

Reviewer: 👍

    "./gogo1.png"
    "./gogo2.png"
    >}} 

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
    "Left: Before, Right: After"
    "./fantasy1.png"
    "./fantasy2.png"
    >}} 

We mentioned before how useful having a software renderer can be for fixing graphical bugs and we hope the previous case shed some light into the why. But just in case, let’s go over another related bugfix.

> After refactoring the software renderer, GPUCode experienced every developer’s worst fear… a regression :shock. The game in question was Kirby’s Blowout Blast, where the sky lost its proper colour and became grey instead of blue. The hardware renderers have had this problem for years but the software renderer was unaffected up until this change. Treating this as an opportunity to also tackle the hardware renderer problems, GPUCode sifted through the pull request changes to pinpoint what went wrong. And the problem was…  an uninitialized variable? You heard that right, zero-initialising a vector variable (combiner_output) broke the game.

Reviewer: 👍

{{< figure src="bad_code.png"
    title="You ruined everything!" >}}

> To explain how this is possible, we need a quick introduction to TEV, the system the 3DS uses to render graphics on the screen even with the lack of pixel shaders. The Texture EnVironment consists of 6 stages of colour and alpha combining. Colour combiners take three input colour values from some source (e.g. interpolated vertex colour, texture colour, previous stage, etc), perform some very simple operations on each of them (e.g inversion) and then calculate the output colour by combining them with some basic arithmetic (e.g addition, multiplication, lerping). Alpha combiners can be configured separately but work in the same manner.

Reviewer: 👍

> The important bit here is that any TEV stage can use the output of the previous stage as its input. Kirby was multiplying the sky colour with the previous stage result to figure out the final colour… in the first stage. How do you get the previous stage colour, when there is no previous stage?

Reviewer: 👍

> By leaving the vector that holds the output of the current TEV stage uninitialized, holding a possibly non-zero undetermined value, it was accidentally preserving the blue sky colour, while the hardware renderers were initialising this value to zero. After doing a few hardware tests and being pointed to relevant documentation by Steveice10, GPUCode determined that using the previous stage as input in the first stage is a special case and results in the vertex colour being given. Implementing this simple observation fixed the sky problems in Kirby, solved certain maps where the ground was not rendered in Fire Emblem Awakening, and surprisingly brought back the missing eyebrows in Puyo Puyo Chronicles

Reviewer: 👍

{{< single-title-imgs-compare

>     "I wish I got a gold medal here as well :<"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "I wish I got a gold medal here as well"
```

    "./kirby1.png"
    "./kirby2.png"
    >}}

{{< single-title-imgs-compare

>     ""

Reviewer: 👍

    "./brow1.png"
    "./brow2.png"
    >}}

## Chapter 2 and the nightmares of precision

Missing graphics can be caused by a variety of reasons, not all of which are related to the fragment stage. Precision related bugs are the bane of emulation, especially when the guest system has lower precision than the host. Case in point, the PICA is a wonderful blend of non-standard floating point types. You get 24-bit floats for most rendering operations, 20-bit floats, 16-bit floats, even a bunch of fixed point formats for miscellaneous registers. It would be strange for Citra not to exhibit at least some precision related glitches. An example is Rune Factory where lakes in dungeons will refuse to render on Citra due to depth precision differences between the host GPU and console. 

{{< figure src="rune.png"
    title="Using small workarounds, rendering can be fixed, but it's not a proper solution nor can it be integrated into upstream yet" >}}

> While this specific issue is for future us to solve, there are other cases we can talk about. The Picross games were notorious for having missing pictures in puzzles which made it cumbersome to select levels to play. In Rabbids Travel in Time 3D the top screen was cut in half during the intro cinematic. The Riki Neketsu series of games also exhibited a similar problem but with the character sprites that were cut in half when facing a specific direction. All these problems had one thing in common and that was clip planes. That information was known even before GPUCode decided to look into the issue, as people quickly found that most of these games were regressed by the original PR from wwylele that implemented user defined PICA clip planes.

Reviewer: 👍

> While this specific issue is for future us to solve, there are other cases we can talk about. The Picross games were notorious for having missing pictures in puzzles which made it cumbersome to select levels to play. In Rabbids Travel in Time 3D the top screen was cut in half during the intro cinematic. The Riki Neketsu series of games also exhibited a similar problem but with the character sprites that were cut in half when facing a specific direction. All these problems had one thing in common and that was clip planes. That information was known even before GPUCode decided to look into the issue, as people quickly found that most of these games were regressed by the original PR from wwylele that implemented user defined PICA clip planes.

Author: All of the Picross games on 3DS have this issue

> While this specific issue is for future us to solve, there are other cases we can talk about. The Picross games were notorious for having missing pictures in puzzles which made it cumbersome to select levels to play. In Rabbids Travel in Time 3D the top screen was cut in half during the intro cinematic. The Riki Neketsu series of games also exhibited a similar problem but with the character sprites that were cut in half when facing a specific direction. All these problems had one thing in common and that was clip planes. That information was known even before GPUCode decided to look into the issue, as people quickly found that most of these games were regressed by the original PR from wwylele that implemented user defined PICA clip planes.

Author: Added specific mention to the game in the original issue, just to be sure

> What is happening here is that the missing 2D elements are being rendered with a z value extremely close to clip plane 0, and thus getting erroneously clipped by the host GPU. The 3DS GPU does not have the required precision to express these tiny depth values and they are likely rounded to zero as a result, avoiding the clipping problems.

Reviewer: 👍

{{< sidebyside "image" ""
    "picross1.png=I am supposed to play blindfolded?"

>     "fight1.png=To whom am I refering to really">}}

Reviewer: 👍

This whole discussion about blending started due to an old issue Pokemon Mystery Dungeon: Gates to Infinity had, where staircases weren’t turning transparent when pokemon were interacting with them. Formerly active Citra developer Subv first looked into the issue and found it was caused by an inaccurate MIN/MAX blending mode handling. The 3DS will multiply the colours with constants, called blend factors, before comparing them, which is something that desktop GPUs will not do. Achieving this behaviour with OpenGL at the time was deemed extremely hard and the case was left unclosed.

6 years later, GPUCode revisited the issue and attempted to solve it using modern tools and available extensions. For NVIDIA and AMD users there are dedicated OpenGL extensions that allow us to change this blending behaviour, namely GL_NV_blend_minmax_factor and GL_AMD_blend_minmax_factor. Enabling these extensions is by far the easiest way to achieve the desired behaviour, however the obvious downside is that these have no support outside of their respective vendors (and outside of Windows in AMDs case), which means they will not suffice for everyone.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare

>     ""

Reviewer: 👍

    >}}

The main challenge with emulating blending is accessing the existing framebuffer colour to perform the necessary calculations with the incoming fragment colour. For phones this is rather easy however, where framebuffer fetch extensions for programmable blending are ubiquitous, and cost very little due to the tiled architecture of mobile GPUs. For them, Citra will detect when emulation is necessary, disable the host blending, and perform the blending operations in the fragment shader with these extensions.

What about the rest of the desktop ecosystem though? Luckily for us, Intel iGPUs support the framebuffer fetch extension, which means the system we developed for mobile can effectively be re-used for them as well. Reusing code is always neat-o. Lastly, for Linux users running the open source RADV driver, we can use a similar approach but instead of simply fetching the framebuffer contents from the shader, we have to attach the framebuffer as a texture and rely on ARB_texture_barrier to get defined behaviour. We hope all these methods combined will cover all platforms Citra can be used for, so everyone regardless of their environment can experience accurate rendering.

> The results speak for themselves, Pokemon Gates to Infinity now renders correctly, and, surprisingly, the Shin Megami Tensei games also had their transparency during battles fixed. This is definitely a pleasant surprise, as these games are very popular, and the community has been asking for a fix for a long time now. So we're happy that this endeavour coincidentally fixed this issue as well! For now this change remains OpenGL only, with plans to also implement it for Vulkan in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The results speak for themselves, Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Gates to Infinity now renders correctly, and, surprisingly, the Shin Megami Tensei games also had their transparency during battles fixed. This is definitely a pleasant surprise, as these games are very popular and the community has been asking for a fix for a long time now. So we're happy that this endeavour coincidentally fixed this issue as well! For now this change remains OpenGL only, with plans to also implement it for Vulkan in the future.
```

{{< single-title-imgs-compare

>     "Battle in style"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "Battle in style!"
```

Reviewer: 👍

    "./shin1.png"
    "./shin2.png"
    >}}

> Not stopping there, GPUCode delivered another graphical fix. This time for Weapon Shop de Omasse, where the intro cinematic would not show up properly. Turns out the game does not properly initialise the register used for forming the output vertex from shader registers. Turning to hardware testing, GPUCode found the default that Citra used in this case was incorrect, and changing it to match the testing results fixed the rendering issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not stopping there, GPUCode delivered another graphical fix. This time for Weapon Shop de Omasse, where the intro cinematic would not display properly. Turns out, the game does not properly initialise the register used for forming the output vertex from shader registers. Turning to hardware testing, GPUCode found the default that Citra used in this case was incorrect and changing it to match the testing results fixed the rendering issues.
```

Reviewer: 👍

{{< figure src="shop.png"
    title="The one time seeing a Level 5 intro made me happy" >}}

You want more? Really? Sure then, let’s travel to the magical realm of texture caching and check out some improvements or ahem..

> ## Chapter 3 - the final boss was the texture cache all along

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Chapter 3 - The final boss was the texture cache all along...
```

Reviewer: 👍

> In the previous progress report, we already went into great detail about the numerous texture cache refactors that enabled exciting features, such as adding a new graphics backend. However there were yet more problems to fix as we later found. Firstly, GPUCode fixed a long-standing regression dating way back to the summer of 2022, where unaligned texture downloads would not be handled correctly. This mainly affected Metroid Prime Federation Force, but could also affect any other game that performed unaligned texture downloads. Interestingly the game went through multiple stages of breakage, with the screen first being shifted to the right, and then shifted a little bit down, before being fixed entirely in the end. Unfortunately, it’s still slow as molasses because the texture cache cannot accelerate display transfers from fill surfaces. When that is addressed, we expect the game to run flawlessly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the previous progress report, we already went into great detail about the numerous texture cache refactors that enabled exciting features, such as adding a new graphics backend. However there were yet more problems to fix as we later found. Firstly, GPUCode fixed a long-standing regression dating way back to the summer of 2022, where unaligned texture downloads would not be handled correctly. This mainly affected Metroid Prime: Federation Force, but could also affect any other game that performed unaligned texture downloads. Interestingly the game went through multiple stages of breakage, with the screen first being shifted to the right, and then shifted a little bit down, before being fixed entirely in the end. Unfortunately, it’s still as slow as molasses because the texture cache cannot accelerate display transfers from fill surfaces. When that is addressed, we expect the game to run flawlessly.
```

Reviewer: 👍

{{< sidebyside "image" ""
    "metroid1.png=A little bit to the left..."
    "metroid2.png=A little bit to the top...">}}

> Secondly, and the last graphical fix we will take a look at today (we need to leave some for the next progress report) GPUCode fixed another long standing set of graphical corruptions that plagued duo Pac Man Party 3D and Tales of the Abyss. The latter seems to be a divisive remake for people, with many comparing the PS2 and 3DS versions extensively. Not like you could play either game on Citra anyway, as both screens would either be black with the hardware renderers or very misaligned in the case of the software renderer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondly, and the last graphical fix we will take a look at today (we do need to leave some for the next progress report, after all), GPUCode fixed another long standing set of graphical corruptions that plagued both Pac-Man Party 3D and Tales of the Abyss. The latter seems to be a divisive remake for people, with many comparing the PS2 and 3DS versions extensively. Not like you could play either game on Citra anyway, as both screens would either be black with the hardware renderers or very misaligned in the case of the software renderer.
```

> It was obvious the bug would be anything but simple to track down. However, a familiar name, Subv, first looked into these games and provided a nice starting point: both games perform strange address calculations in their display transfer routines. Armed with that information, GPUCode opened Tales of Abyss in a decompiler and set out to discover what exactly the games were doing. And with a little effort, the offending code was found. It was triggered only when the games were using specific display transfer parameters. Pac Man Party 3D and Tales of the Abyss both made use of those.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It was obvious the bug would be anything but simple to track down. However a familiar name, Subv, first looked into these games and provided a nice starting point: both games perform strange address calculations in their display transfer routines. Armed with that information, GPUCode opened Tales of Abyss in a decompiler and set out to discover what exactly the games were doing. And, with a little effort, the offending code was found. It was triggered only when the games were using specific display transfer parameters. Pac-Man Party 3D and Tales of the Abyss both made use of those.
```

{{< figure src="pacman1.png"
    title="Honey, spacetime is warping again" >}}

> But the question was, why? These two games are the only ones reported to exhibit this misalignment. Were they trying to workaround hardware quirks when doing transfers with the specific parameters? As you know by now, these questions can only be answered by testing, testing, and even more testing. Luckily for us, this hypothesis proved to be correct, as the console results did not match what Citra was doing. The solution was also surprisingly straightforward: take the output address and transform it the opposite way the game does when using the same display transfer parameters. This not only fixed rendering but also emulated the broken rendering that the hardware exhibits. Fun fact, the weirdness doesn't end for the case of the Tales of the Abyss. The game also triggered a bunch of edge cases in Citra's geometry shader implementation that made it crash in the first battle. At the time of writing these edge cases have already been hw-tested and implemented, which makes the game fully playable. We'll talk about those next time around though.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But the question was, "why?". These two games are the only ones reported to exhibit this misalignment. Were they trying to workaround hardware quirks when doing transfers with the specific parameters? As you know by now, these questions can only be answered by testing, *testing*, and even more testing. Luckily for us, this hypothesis proved to be correct, as the console results did not match what Citra was doing. The solution was also surprisingly straightforward: take the output address and transform it the opposite way the game does when using the same display transfer parameters. This not only fixed rendering but also emulated the broken rendering that the hardware exhibits. Fun fact, the weirdness doesn't end for the case of the Tales of the Abyss. The game also triggered a bunch of edge cases in Citra's geometry shader implementation that made it crash in the first battle. At the time of writing these edge cases have already been hardware tested and implemented, which makes the game fully playable. We'll talk about those next time around, though.
```

{{< sidebyside "image" ""
    "pacman2.png=Can I have a cookie too please?"

>     "tales_goofy.png=I bet he's is excited to relive the adventure on Citra">}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "tales_goofy.png=I bet he's excited to relive the adventure on Citra">}}
```

Reviewer: 👍

## End of story, shader lessons learned

> While this marks the end of the graphical fixes, there are still more graphical additions to cover. With the inclusion of Apple Silicon support this year, a feat that required changes to almost every part of the codebase, Citra has expanded its arm64 support greatly. As part of that effort, regular contributor [Wunkolo](https://github.com/Wunkolo) stepped up to make a whole new shader JIT backend targeting the ARM architecture. The dynamic CPU duo, [merryhime](https://github.com/merryhime) and [JosJuice](https://github.com/JosJuice), chimed in and provided valuable feedback, so a big thanks goes out to them as well. The new backend will be enabled by default on arm64 platforms, resulting in about double the performance on most games with hardware shaders disabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this marks the end of the graphical fixes, there are still more graphical additions to cover. With the inclusion of Apple Silicon support this year, a feat that required changes to almost every part of the codebase, Citra has expanded its arm64 support greatly. As part of that effort, regular contributor [Wunkolo](https://github.com/Wunkolo) stepped up to make a whole new shader JIT backend targeting the ARM architecture. Both [merryhime](https://github.com/merryhime) and [JosJuice](https://github.com/JosJuice) chimed in and provided valuable feedback, so a big thanks goes out to them as well. The new backend will be enabled by default on arm64 platforms, resulting in about double the performance on most games with hardware shaders disabled.
```
Calling them a duo makes people think they work together

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
    "The difference is real"
    "./mario1.jpg"
    "./mario2.jpg"
    >}}

The benefit of improving shader JIT performance might not be immediately obvious, when hardware shaders exist and have great performance on the vast majority of devices. However, there are rare situations where hardware shaders cannot be used, causing the emulator to fallback to the software implementation as a means of maintaining accuracy. One such case is geometry shaders, which are very difficult to emulate on the host GPU due to 3DS hardware quirks. Games that make heavy use of these shaders will see a noticeable performance boost with this addition. As an example, the Monster Hunter games use geometry shaders to render the grass, leading to the slow shader interpreter having to handle all those draw calls, causing a significant slowdown. Now, these areas run at full speed with no issues!

{{< figure src="hunter_grass.png"
    title="Perfect place for hide and seek" >}}

> Wunk not only added a brand new shader backend though, but also improved the existing x86 JIT by implementing additional optimizations using Intel AVX and AVX512 instruction sets. Processors that support these instruction sets will see a small, but noticeable, performance uplift.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wunkolo not only added a brand new shader backend, though, but also improved the existing x86 JIT by implementing additional optimizations using Intel AVX and AVX512 instruction sets. Processors that support these instruction sets will see a small, but noticeable, performance uplift.
```

> They say history repeats itself and our shader problems sure do so as well. It was well known for a while that Citra generated an excessive amount of shaders for many games. Even repetitive actions like opening a door in Luigi's Mansion Dark Moon would generate new shaders and cause stutter. The Vulkan backend helped to alleviate most of the stuttering with a clever combination of parallel shader compilation and driver queries, but the shader generation still occurred. For many mobile devices specifically, the shader cache would grow too large, causing the device to run out of memory and crash. That's a big no-no for sure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They say history repeats itself... and our shader problems sure do so as well. It was well known for a while that Citra generated an excessive amount of shaders for many games. Even repetitive actions like opening a door in Luigi's Mansion Dark Moon would generate new shaders and cause stutter. The Vulkan backend helped to alleviate most of the stuttering with a clever combination of parallel shader compilation and driver queries, but the shader generation still occurred. For many mobile devices specifically, the shader cache would grow too large, causing the device to run out of memory and crash. That's a big no-no for sure.
```

{{< figure src="many_shaders.png"
    title="How many thousands is that again?" >}}

> It's hard to believe any game would intentionally require that many shaders. Most likely there was some shader duplication going on, that made Citra do unnecessary work. What we couldn't envision was in how many areas this duplication was manifesting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's hard to believe any game would intentionally require that many shaders. Most likely there was some shader duplication going on that made Citra do unnecessary work. What we couldn't envision was in how many areas this duplication was manifesting.
```

Contributor [m4wx](https://github.com/m4xw) first [noticed](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6895) something peculiar: Citra would always take into consideration the PICA lighting state when generating fragment shaders, even when lighting was disabled completely. Changing lighting parameters shouldn't matter much when the feature is disabled, yet Citra would generate new shaders each time. By masking out parameters when their respective feature is disabled, the amount of generated shaders has been greatly reduced, without any behavioural changes.

> Based on this observation by m4wx, GPUCode expanded upon it, by masking out even more unnecessary parameters, this time in the TEV shader generation. This mainly affected the title screen of A Link Between Worlds, which generated dozens of duplicate shaders. With that change the number of shaders being compiled was halved once more. The final change regarding shader compilation was done on the OpenGL backend. As a remnant of old OpenGL versions, Citra would respecify the uniform interface for every compiled shader, even though that never practically changed. This interface describes what data the fragment shader receives from the vertex shader and what data from the CPU. Utilising ARB_explicit_uniform_location afforded by the OpenGL version upgrade to 4.3, Citra no longer has to do this, further reducing the amount of work done per shader.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on this observation by m4wx, GPUCode expanded upon it, by masking out even more unnecessary parameters, this time in the TEV shader generation. This mainly affected the title screen of The Legend of Zelda: A Link Between Worlds, which generated dozens of duplicate shaders. With that change the number of shaders being compiled was halved once more. The final change regarding shader compilation was done on the OpenGL backend. As a remnant of old OpenGL versions, Citra would specify the uniform interface for every compiled shader, even though that never practically changed. This interface describes what data the fragment shader receives from the vertex shader and what data from the CPU. Utilising `ARB_explicit_uniform_location` afforded by the OpenGL version upgrade to 4.3, Citra no longer has to do this, further reducing the amount of work done per shader.
```

# Audio

> Developer Sachin [refactored](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/7026) DSP interrupt handling, which makes the implementation easier to use and unit test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Developer SachinVin [refactored](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/7026) DSP interrupt handling, which makes the implementation easier to use and unit test.
```

Reviewer: 👍

> Steveice10 also landed a bunch of audio improvements, one of which specifically benefits Android users. Since Android phones often vary in performance, Citra employs a dynamic approach to audio stretching on said platform, where it is automatically enabled or disabled depending on whether the game is running at full speed or not. This ensures that no jarring audio cutoffs occur during gameplay. However, many users noted that audio stretching noticeably lowered the final audio quality and would exhibit strange speedups and slowdowns at random times.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Steveice10 also landed a bunch of audio improvements, one of which specifically benefits Android users. Since Android phones often vary in performance, Citra employs a dynamic approach to audio stretching on said platform, where it is automatically enabled or disabled depending on whether the game is running at full speed or not. This ensures that no jarring audio cut-offs occur during gameplay. However, many users noted that audio stretching noticeably lowered the final audio quality and would exhibit strange speedups and slowdowns at random times.
```

To make a long story short, when the time stretcher is turned off, audio samples would be flushed from it into the output before proceeding with regular audio. If the amount of audio in the stretcher was too large for the output buffer, Citra would leave sample data behind in the stretcher. Then, when the stretcher is enabled again, the leftover audio from the past would be played, leading to a desync in audio playback. To solve this, Steveice10 ensured that the time stretcher [clears the remaining data](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/7081) after flushing to the output as much as possible.

> A significant rework was also done to the ACC decoder infrastructure by the same developer. Because the AAC codec used by 3DS games was patented, Citra could not bundle a library to decode it. Rather it needed to rely on the host operating system facilities, which can vary widely on quality and features. For example the Windows WMF ACC decoder is riddled with bugs from having too [low volume](https://www.djuced.com/kb/my-m4a-and-aac-files-volume-are-too-low-on-windows-11-update-22h2/), producing [incorrect](https://forum.blackmagicdesign.com/viewtopic.php?f=21&t=169250#p897900) audio waveforms and, more relevant for us, [causing](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/issues/5932) audio desync in rhythm games like Rhythm Heaven Megamix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A significant rework was also done to the AAC decoder infrastructure by the same developer. Because the AAC codec used by 3DS games was patented, Citra could not bundle a library to decode it. Rather, it needed to rely on the host operating system facilities, which can vary widely on quality and features. For example, the Windows WMF AAC decoder is riddled with bugs from having too [low volume](https://www.djuced.com/kb/my-m4a-and-aac-files-volume-are-too-low-on-windows-11-update-22h2/), producing [incorrect audio waveforms](https://forum.blackmagicdesign.com/viewtopic.php?f=21&t=169250#p897900) and, more relevant for us, [causing audio desync](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/issues/5932) in rhythm games such as Rhythm Heaven Megamix.
```

Reviewer: 👍

> As it turns out though, the patent for ACC-LC, the codec used by the 3DS specifically, has been considered expired for many years. Other groups like [Fedora's legal team](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1501522#c112) and [Flatpak maintainers](https://gitlab.com/freedesktop-sdk/freedesktop-sdk/-/merge_requests/293#note_87343708) have also concluded that the patents for AAC-LC have expired and can be considered free for use. With this information, Steivece10 stripped out the various AAC decoder implementations and replaced them with one universal bundled decoder, trimmed down to include only the relevant codec. This makes Citra's support of AAC no longer require specific external dependencies like in the case of Linux. It also makes it consistent across different platforms instead of having varying latency and quality depending on the supported backend. Further work on improving ACC support can be performed on this one backend for all platforms as needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As it turns out though, the patent for AAC-LC, the codec used by the 3DS specifically, has been considered expired for many years. Other groups like [Fedora's legal team](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1501522#c112) and [Flatpak maintainers](https://gitlab.com/freedesktop-sdk/freedesktop-sdk/-/merge_requests/293#note_87343708) have also concluded that the patents for AAC-LC have expired and can be considered free for use. With this information, Steveice10 stripped out the various AAC decoder implementations and replaced them with one universal bundled decoder, trimmed down to include only the relevant codec. This makes Citra's support of AAC no longer require on specific external dependencies, like in the case of Linux. It also makes it consistent across different platforms instead of having varying latency and quality depending on the supported backend. Further work on improving AAC support can be performed on this one backend for all platforms as needed.
```

{{< mp4 src="moosic.mp4" title="The beat is addicting... your writer needs a little practise though" >}}

> That said, our HLE audio emulation is not perfect. For example, virtual console games have [distorted](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/issues/2552) or no audio at all, some other games have [missing](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/issues/5663) audio as well. To combat this, we have begun efforts to improve the performance of our LLE audio backend so it can serve as a viable alternative for those problematic cases. Developer Sachin has started work on a Ghidra [plugin](https://github.com/SachinVin/TeakLite-SLEIGH) for the Teak architecture, which is used by the 3DS DSP. This will allow us to more easily understand the inner workings of the firmware used to drive the DSP. With the aid of this tool, GPUCode wrote a prototype JIT compiler for the DSP. Early tests have shown an impressive 2x performance boost over the reference interpreter. We will probably have more to say on the matter in a few months time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That said, our HLE audio emulation is not perfect. For example, Virtual Console games have [distorted](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/issues/2552) or no audio at all, some other games have [missing](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/issues/5663) audio as well. To combat this, we have begun efforts to improve the performance of our LLE audio backend so it can serve as a viable alternative for those problematic cases. Developer SachinVin has started work on a Ghidra [plugin](https://github.com/SachinVin/TeakLite-SLEIGH) for the Teak architecture, which is used by the 3DS DSP. This will allow us to more easily understand the inner workings of the firmware used to drive the DSP. With the aid of this tool, GPUCode wrote a prototype JIT compiler for the DSP. Early tests have shown an impressive 2x performance boost over the reference interpreter. We will probably have more to say on the matter in a few months time.
```

# Conclusion

> Finally, we're done. Another year, another set of changes that bring us ever closer to fully capturing the experience of using this wonderful handheld. Development has been progressing at lightning speeds this year, which we are very proud of and gives us more interesting content to talk about in progress reports. Same as before big props to the Citra community, the developers and all the people that keep the project alive and well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anddd finally, we're done. Another year, another amazing set of changes that brings us ever closer to fully capturing the experience of using this wonderful handheld console. Development has been progressing at lightning speeds this past year and into 2024, which we are very proud of and gives us more interesting content to talk about in progress reports. Same as before, big props to the Citra community, the developers and all the people that keep the project alive and well!
```

If you want to support this project, we have a [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/citraemu)! Donations to the Patreon go directly to our team to assist with obtaining hardware for testing and keeping our servers up and running. Donations are not required, but are greatly appreciated!

If you are looking to contribute to Citra or just want to get involved with our community, you can find us on our [Discord server](https://discord.com/invite/FAXfZV9) or on our IRC channel (#citra @ [Libera.Chat](https://libera.chat/)). 

> To those of you who made it to the end, thanks for reading! We have many more exciting things to tell you all about in the future, so stay tuned!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Don't really think we need an ending bit here tbf and this is just a copy from a previous report

+++
date = "2024-01-25T20:00:00+01:00"
title = "Citra Progress Report 2023 H2"
tags = [ "progress-report" ]
author = "emufan_4568"
coauthor = "PabloMK7"

> forum = 845615

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
forum = 1013527
```
Opened a post for this article, will be listed once this is merged
https://community.citra-emu.org/t/citra-progress-report-2023-h2/1013527

+++

<Intro>

# Contents
1. [Emulation]({{< relref "#emulation" >}})
1. [Network]({{< relref "#network" >}})
1. [Amiibo]({{< relref "#amiibo" >}})
1. [Graphics]({{< relref "#graphics" >}})
1. [Miscellaneous]({{< relref "#miscellaneous" >}})
1. [Conclusion]({{< relref "#conclusion" >}})

# Emulation

There was a lot of progress this time around in achieving full system emulation. Just this year HOME Menu emulation became a reality which unlocked a whole new world of applications that needed care and attension. Work never ends, does it?

Last time we mentioned that, while launching games from the HOME menu worked, suspending or re-launching titles was generally hit-or-miss, with some titles crashing outright. This is because Citra was not cleaning up kernel objects correctly on process shutdown. Games deservedly expect a clean environment when they are launched and any operating system worth its salt is responsible for that. A process in HorizonOS is conceptually quite similar to the concept of a process in modern operating systems. It has its own address space, child threads, and is responsible for babysitting any kernel objects created by those threads.

> Given that we are talking about this in a progress report, it’s safe to say that's a problem no more. Steveice10 [pulled](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6680) a few strings here and there and made sure that exiting a kernel process releases all the memory it owns and stops its child threads as well.

Author: Reworded to "turned a few nobs", lmk if this is a better way of phrasing that
